
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

🧠 Git & GitHub - Tutorial Notes
✅ What is Git?

Git is a version control system used to:

Keep track of changes in code over time.

Revert back to previous versions if needed.

Collaborate with multiple developers efficiently.

✅ What is GitHub?

GitHub is a web-based hosting service for Git repositories.

It allows you to:

Store code online.

Collaborate with others via branches and pull requests.

Track issues and manage projects.

🧩 Alternatives: GitBucket, Bitbucket, GitLab

🛠️ Setting Up Git (First Time Only)
1. Download & Install Git

Download from: https://git-scm.com

2. Open Command Prompt
git --version

3. Configure Git (one-time setup)
git config --global user.name "megachandran"
git config --global user.email "developer.it.mega@gmail.com"

📦 Cloning a Repository from GitHub
1. Open VS Code

Open a folder for Git

2. Open Terminal
git clone <repo-link>
cd <folder-name>

3. Create or edit files
touch filename.txt  # or create file in editor

🔄 Git Workflow: Basic Commands
Step	Command	Description
Check status	git status	Shows current changes
Add file	git add filename	Moves file to staging area
Add all files	git add .	Stages all files in the folder
Commit	git commit -m "message"	Saves changes in local repo
Push	git push origin main	Uploads changes to GitHub

➡️ Insert → Add → Commit → Push

❌ Deleting a File

Delete the file manually or via command

rm filename.txt


Then run:

git add .
git commit -m "Deleted filename"
git push origin main

🏗️ Creating a New Project (From Scratch)
1. Create and enter folder
mkdir newfolder
cd newfolder

2. Initialize Git
git init

3. Create files and add them
touch index.html
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit"

4. Create a New Repository on GitHub (manually)
5. Link Local Repo to GitHub
git remote add origin <repo-link>
git branch -M main  # rename master to main (optional)
git push origin main

🌿 Working with Branches
Task	Command
Show branches	git branch -a
Create a branch	git branch branchname
Switch to branch	git checkout branchname
Pull updates	git pull
Difference between branches	git diff branch1
Merge a branch	git merge branch1
Push changes	git push origin branchname
Switch back to main	git checkout main
🔁 Pull Requests (PRs)

If you don’t have write access to the main branch:

Create a branch.

Make changes.

Push to GitHub.

Go to GitHub → Open a Pull Request.

⚠️ Conflicts

Occur when two or more people edit the same file.

Git gets confused about which change to keep.

To resolve:
git pull origin main
# Manually resolve conflicts in the file
git add .
git commit -m "Resolved conflict"
git push origin main

💡 Summary of Common Commands
git init                        # Initialize Git in a folder
git clone <repo-url>           # Clone a GitHub repo
git status                     # Check current status
git add .                      # Stage all files
git commit -m "message"        # Commit changes
git push origin main           # Push to GitHub
git branch                     # List branches
git checkout branchname        # Switch branches
git merge branchname           # Merge branch into current
git pull origin main           # Pull updates from GitHub

------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Own notes 


git and github 

version control 
keep tracking  code
collaborate on code (multiple people use code at the same time)


github is web based git repository 

gitbucket , bitbucket (alternative)

-commit message will be given when commit an update or changes .

-download and install git .
-open cmd 
type git

git config --global user.name "megachandran"

git config --global user.email "developer.it.mega@gmail.com"


-open git hub folder in local git 
-open vs code 
open a folder for git 
open terminal -git clone (repo link inside code in github)
cd filenmae ( to use file )
create new file and open the file 

- git status 
-git add filename 
add the file from working folder to stage area.
- git commit -m "messages "
add the file from staging area to local git
-git push origin main
file from loackl git is pushed to github repository and upated in github 
insert-> add->commit->push

delete a file same process 



create a new folder and host that folder in github
cd.. back
-create a folder 
-make edit 
-git init (create a git folder or make the folder as git folder)

-git add . (to add all files in the folder  )

now create a new repo for connect locally created repository to github 
-create ne repo
- git remote add origin ( link in repo)
-git branch (*master)
-git branch -M main (change master to main)
-git push origin main


how branches works?

-git branch -a ( shows list of branches)
-git pull ( to take branches from github to local repo)
same steps for adding or modifying the files in new branchs 
while push u can use created branch name

-git checkout main (change the branch to main)

-git diff gitbranch1 ( to check the difference between 2 branches)
-git merge gitbranch1 (merge the sub brach to main branch)
-get push origin main ( to check the changes)


-pull request

-git branch branchname (create new branch)

while we hae no direct access to the main branch we can give pull request

access pull request in the github directly inside the repository

-conflicts 
when 2 person using or accessing the same file the git get confused 


-git pull origin main (give or  update changes in main to sub repo)


































